---
title: "The mirror me"
thumbnail: "/images/IMG-20251221-WA0022.jpg"
date: '2026-01-04'
description: "The mirror in my bathroom..."
category: 'personal'
published: true
color: "orange" 
---

<Yc />

<Yt src="https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLTLeI7tcJHJ7xXPTSIiaHaIKpIsNi5B6H&si=2ADok1HjHkc4Hhdt" />

<Pi
    src="IMG-20251221-WA0022.jpg" 
    caption="The mirror me"
/>

The mirror in my bathroom has the matte patience of a government file. It’s not even properly a mirror anymore, more like a reflective rumor: the silver backing has blistered in constellations, the edges have gone sepia, and if I lean too close I can see my breath briefly cloud it like a small, private monsoon. The light is cruel in the way cheap tube-lights are cruel—flat, municipal, without the decency of shadow—so the face that arrives is not an event but a verdict: tired skin, hollowing under the eyes, the mouth set in that permanent Bengali skepticism that looks like annoyance even when it’s just… thinking.

And yet the mind doing the looking—this is the problem, this is always the problem—shows up in the mirror wearing an old, overconfident shirt from the 1980s, sleeves rolled, hair still obedient, the whole internal posture of a boy who believes adulthood is a crisp suit you step into one fine day, like a Bollywood montage, and then you simply start earning respect and cholesterol. *Pollyanna*, yes—let’s call it that, because the word itself sounds like a plastic doll you could buy at New Market and regret by evening. The mind is still auditioning for the role of “bright young man,” while the face has been promoted without consent into “middle-aged uncle who has opinions about everything.”

The mirror is a basic optical device, obviously—light bounces, the angle of incidence equals the angle of reflection, physics applauds itself—yet it behaves like philosophy. It doesn’t show me “me.” It shows me a negotiation between expectation and photons. If brains were honest, the mirror would display a caption: this is your predictive model failing in real time. The boy in my head predicts a certain face because he has not updated his priors since cassette tapes and Doordarshan; the world returns a different dataset, and the error signal arrives as disgust, comedy, grief—choose your poison.

There’s a neat piece of brain trivia people love to misuse at dinner parties: mirror neurons, those little theatrical cells that light up when you act and when you watch someone else act, as if the brain can’t resist doing a bit of method acting. Every WhatsApp philosopher uses this to say we are all connected, love is science, clap clap. But the darker mirror is not empathy; it’s self-recognition. The brain watching itself is like a dog trying to bite its own tail: furious sincerity, ridiculous mechanics. I look at my face and what I’m really seeing is a model of myself—constructed, maintained, defended—being forced to reconcile with a thing called time, which is not a metaphor, not a lesson, not even particularly Indian, just the indifferent bookkeeping of entropy.

People say “adolescence” as if it means acne and mood swings, but it comes from a Latin root about growing toward something—adolescere—like a plant leaning to light. Nobody mentions the unfunny possibility that some of us grow toward a fantasy and then just… stop, stuck reaching forever, stiff as a cheap plastic bougainvillea. I’ve met men who are sixty and still living inside the thirteen-year-old’s courtroom where they are either praised or punished, either the hero or the fool. That inner boy doesn’t retire; he just becomes a cynical accountant, still obsessed with fairness, still keeping score of every insult since 1992.

I used to think this was a personal flaw. Now I suspect it’s a feature of the whole education system: we train people to perform cleverness the way circus bears are trained to ride bicycles. You jump through exam hoops, you learn the posture of certainty, you become a “bright student,” you get rewarded for sounding right rather than being right, and you carry that posture into adulthood like an inherited spine. Then one day you stand in front of a mirror in the unfashionable fringes of South Calcutta—where the streets are dusty and ambitious in the worst way, and the buildings are always mid-construction, like everyone lives inside a perpetual excuse—and you realize nobody is grading you anymore. No invigilator. No marks. Just your face, looking like it has been doing unpaid overtime for years.

And here the postcolonial part of my brain clears its throat—because it always does, like a professor who can’t help himself. The mirror is a European object in the way the calendar is a European object: a system for telling you where you are in time, and therefore where you should be in life. Colonial modernity didn’t just bring railways and laws; it brought the idea that your life can be audited. You should have achieved X by age Y. You should have become “somebody.” (As if being a body wasn’t already sufficient work.) Macaulay gave us an education designed to create clerks; we kept the clerk-soul and swapped the Empire for newer logos. Now the clerk in my head stands before the mirror and files a complaint: why has the product aged? why is the output not matching the brochure?

I’m aware, before anyone sends me a moral lecture disguised as concern, that this is not unique to Bengali men. But Bengali men do have a particular talent for turning private disappointments into public theories, preferably over tea, preferably with footnotes. We can’t just be sad; we have to be sad with citations. We can’t just be aging; we have to be aging *correctly*, with a properly articulated resentment about the decline of standards. The old North Calcutta archetype—the bhadralok with his books and his bruised dignity—has a whole mythology of self-respect, and if you don’t fit the mythology, you compensate by sharpening your tongue until it could shave.

*Crusty*, I called myself. It’s a good word because it’s honest about texture. Middle age is not just an age; it’s a layer. You accumulate little shells: habits, disappointments, the faint mineral deposits of all the times you had to swallow something you didn’t believe. Some people become smooth with age—those lucky creatures who forgive or forget or monetize their pain into motivational podcasts. Others become crusty, and not even in a charming sourdough way, more like the kettle in a Calcutta kitchen that has seen too much hard water and not enough descaling.

There’s a strange hypocrisy in my own disgust, because I despise performative intellectualism while performing it with Olympic enthusiasm. I can hear myself—listen to this fellow, he’s doing etymology in the bathroom—yet I keep going, because the alternative is silence, and silence is when the mirror wins. I’m a rationalist, an atheist, a man allergic to spiritual branding, and yet I understand the appeal: religion offers you a flattering narrative about your inner youth. The soul never ages. The essence is eternal. The body is just a temporary rental. Very convenient, like a cosmic return policy. My version of that comfort is science, which offers no comfort at all, only explanations—beautiful, pitiless explanations that do not care about my nostalgia.

Sometimes, if I’m in a slightly hypomanic mood, the mirror becomes a lab instrument. I start thinking about it like an interferometer: two waves overlap—what I feel I am and what I appear to be—and the pattern of bright and dark bands is my mood. When the phases align, I can almost laugh: yes, this is me, this worn face, this stubborn brain, this odd little life cobbled together from books and setbacks and tea. When they don’t align, it’s a kind of private vertigo. I feel “young” in the way a software program feels “new”—the core logic unchanged—while the hardware has been dropped too many times.

Then the depressive clarity arrives, not dramatic, not poetic, just plain: nobody is coming to validate this. There is no grand reveal. The self is not a hidden treasure. It’s a maintenance problem. You keep the system running, you patch bugs, you manage energy. You try not to let the whole thing crash.

Outside, the neighborhood wakes up with its usual noisy conviction. A vendor calls out, a scooter coughs, someone argues loudly about something that will never be resolved. Calcutta, eternal in its confidence that volume is a form of truth. I look again, and the mirror shows me not an archetype or a tragedy or a failed prodigy, but a man standing in a small room with bad lighting, alive, unglamorous, still capable of noticing things.

I wipe the glass with the corner of my towel, leaving a smear that makes my face look briefly like an impressionist painting, kinder than realism, and in that blur I find the only defiance I can reliably afford: to keep looking without pretending it’s noble.

My breath fogs the mirror again, a soft white bloom, and for a second I disappear completely—finally improved by subtraction—then the glass clears, and there I am, back to being an unpaid clerk of my own existence.
